And now it's my honor to introduce to you Jonathan Rauch. I first came to know Jonathan through his trenchant writing about American politics when I was a graduate student in the early 1990s. John burst into the world of thought leadership with an uncanny ability to compress and do so accurately complex ideas into pithy, memorable phrases and words. John coined terms like "demosclerosis" and "kindly inquisitors," which became titles of his very influential books. Demosclerosis, for example, describes the way in which entrenched interest groups, not through malice or conspiracy, but through ordinary processes inherent in our system, impede government responsiveness and reform. Analogizing this process to arteriosclerosis in the human body, where arteries clog and restrict blood over time. In his book "Kindly Inquisitors," he describes individuals or groups who, despite the best of intentions, end up undermining free speech and open debate by promoting censorship and intellectual conformity or suppression of dissenting ideas. Topics, by the way, which are elaborated on in his magisterial 2021 book, "The Constitution of Knowledge." John, as a prolific and award-winning contributor to outlets such as The Atlantic, The National Journal, The New York Times Magazine, The Wall Street Journal, and now Deseret Magazine, models for me what is best in long-form journalism. He joins together his careful listening and keen observation with a deep appreciation for ideas and theory. The result are poignant and memorable descriptions and explanations based on evidence and empiricism. His expository writing and advocacy spans topics as technical as public finance, the psychology of introversion, to hot-button social issues such as same-sex marriage and DEI. When I was editor of Deseret News, I came to know John personally as we worked together on how to understand, share, and amplify the singular accomplishment of what's known as the Utah Compromise of 2015, which you'll hear more about tonight. When I had the honor of finally meeting John, I knew that I'd find in him analytical genius. What I didn't anticipate is that I would also find a quiet builder of intellectual community, an unmatched curiosity, humility, and compassion. John has strengthened my appreciation for and understanding of our unique constitutional democracy, its promise, and its peril, and the tapestry of faith that undergirds our common life as a nation. Tonight, we have the privilege of learning from John himself the key elements of his book "Cross-Purposes: Christianity's Broken Bargain with Democracy." Please join me in providing a warm BYU welcome to Jonathan Rauch.

Well, after an introduction like that, the rest will be an anticlimax. I am so honored to be with you at BYU, and there are more thank yous than I could possibly deliver. So I won't even try; I would leave too many out. Without the guidance of Paul Edwards in bringing me into a deeper understanding of his world, without the support of Elder Cook who gave me an interview and helped me understand the church, without the friendship of Troy Williams from Equality Utah, a kindred spirit as we search for solutions to our problems of justice and equity within the context of a constitutional order that requires compromise, and, of course, thanks to someone without whom a big chunk of this work would not have been possible, who is here today in spirit, and that, of course, is President Oaks. The core of this work, of this book, is I describe it as two mistakes and a correction. So I guess we'd better start with the mistake.

That's me, age 16, a good example of why we're all happy not to be 16. At that point in my life, I already knew and had for some years that I did not believe in God; I've never had faith. I am Jewish by heritage but have been an atheist since childhood. And I also knew there was something profoundly different about me because I was in love with boys at my age. At that point, I didn't know what to call it. But something that I did know was that I was marked as an outcast from the prominent and predominant faith of my country, Christianity. I knew because anyone who turned the radio dial on a Sunday morning would hear that people like me were a stench in the nostril of God, that God hated us, wanted us to change, thought we were sinners, and outright sick. I believed at age 16 that Christianity was a home of bigotry, hypocrisy, and cruelty. And I have to tell you, standing here tonight, sometimes it was, and sometimes it still is.

That's where I was coming from when I met Mark McIntosh. We were thrown together as college roommates. These are the four of us from my freshman year suite in college. Mark was a profoundly devout Episcopal. And he was the first Christian I was ever exposed to who not only talked the talk, but walked the walk. He was a brilliant guy, but also a person of great humility and compassion. Of course, he had a temper; of course, he could lash out. But this was the first time I saw someone modeling what Christianity could mean. And that set me on a journey which led over time to a change in attitude and understanding, but unfortunately not enough of a change in attitude.

This is an article I wrote for The Atlantic in 2003. And it is officially, wait for it, the dumbest thing I ever wrote. This article celebrated the rise of secularism in America. I called it apatheism, people not caring about God one way or the other. I said, "I believe that the rise of apatheism is to be celebrated as nothing less than a major civilizational advance." Religion remains the most divisive and volatile of social forces. Apatheism is not a lapse; it is an achievement.

Well, the context is in 2015, I wrote in The Atlantic that Donald Trump would never be president. This is dumber. I thought in 2003 that as religion, which in America means predominantly Christianity, which means predominantly white Protestantism, faded from view and people became less invested in Christianity, more secular, we would turn into a kind of Scandinavia: religion's a divisive force, so we'll get along better, we'll be more enlightened. Isn't this a nice thing?

Well, what I did not know was that in 2003, when I wrote those words, we were embarking on exactly that experiment. But for the last 20 years, and folks, this is a recent phenomenon. This is all in the last 15 or 20 years. We've been embarking in America on an unprecedented wave of secularization and a collapse or near-collapse of Christianity as we've known it.

So in this chart, you see the number of adults. It's the red line. Never attending religious services. This is overwhelmingly Christianity we're talking about, of course. That number grows from 44 million to 85 million. 40 million people over the course here of only 14 years. That's more people leaving religion than entered during all three of the Great Awakenings.

This chart is from Gallup. This shows the percentage of people who are church members among U.S. adults. And what you can see there, this goes back to the 1940s. And you see right through the end of the 20th century, this number is more or less stable. It declines a little bit, but not very much. It hovers around 70% of the population. And that's why when I was growing up as a kid, it was routine to ask people when you met them: "What job do you have? What school did you go to? Where are you from?" You might ask those things, but at least as commonly you would ask, "What church do you belong to?"

Well, you can see what happens to this line starting in 2000. It drops like a rock so that by 2020, only 47% of Americans are church members, fewer than half.

Here's what's happening within Christianity, specifically. This is Pew data. What you see here is in 2007, 78% of Americans identify as Christians. Only 14 years later, that's down to 63%. That's a 15-point drop in 14 years, a percentage point a year. We've never seen anything like that.

Where are they going? You can see that in the other line. No religion. That's up from 16 points to 29 points. That's 13 points.

Here's what's happening within Christianity. This is Pew data. Now, I want you to focus first on white mainline evangelical Protestants. You should be able to see that trend. It's circled at either end of the line. And this is, ah, that one's in the wrong place. Okay, so what we're looking for here is the blue line. 17.8% of Christians are white mainline Protestants. And that drops over these last 20 years to about 13%. So that's a drop. But we all knew that the mainline churches were caving in. That's a 20th-century story.

What's different is what you see here. Sorry about the labeling. Got a bit confused. That top line there, that's white evangelical Protestants. And what you see is that over the same period, they have followed the same trajectory as the mainline churches and wound up at the exact same place at the bottom of that curve; they too are only 13% of the population.

Folks, that is yesterday's newspaper. That is not what's happening anymore. Those churches, white evangelicals, are caving in too. There you see that. But where are they going? This is people unaffiliated with any religion at all, the so-called Nones. This is now America's predominant faith. That's over a quarter of the population.

Well, I was supposed to love this, right? Whoopee, great news. Well, I picked a few variables at random. You've seen all of these data yourself. I am the first to agree. And what I'm about to show you, a lot of things happened at the same time. This is not all about the decline of religion. You had the coming of cell phones and social media, over-parenting, and all the things people talk about. But it can't be a coincidence that, for example, over the same period, you see this rapid increase in mental health problems.

This is the number of not-good mental health days, and you can see there that top line, the red line. That's people 18 to 25. Look at that spike. Here's Surgeon General's report, 2023: epidemic of loneliness and isolation. Here's what was going on at exactly the same period that we saw the collapse of Christianity. Social isolation up, social engagement with friends down, way down; social engagement with others down, companionship down.

And I pulled those at random. There's just pages of that stuff. And it's dangerous. It's really bad for you. The Surgeon General says lacking social connection is as dangerous as smoking up to 15 cigarettes a day.

And here's something else I didn't anticipate. Setting aside health, mental health, and everything else. Another development in that same period is this. This is what political scientists call affective polarization. We've always been a society divided on policy: taxes too high, too low; government too big, too small; foreign policy, intervene or donate; you know, all that stuff; abortion, whatever.

This is different. This is the percentage of people who hate and fear the other side. And that's not about issues. This has skyrocketed just in recent years to these levels like we have never seen before. This is from Pew. Again, they're typical. There's lots of stuff like this. The percentage of people saying that the other party is closed-minded has risen 69% and 83%. That's Democrats and Republicans dishonest, 64%, 72%. Immoral, 63% and 72%, up from only six years earlier numbers that were below 50%.

Again, ladies and gentlemen, there's no precedent for this in American life. And the problem with affective polarization is it's not transactional. You can't negotiate it away. It's one thing if you disagree with the other side; then maybe you can work things out. But if you hate them, if you fear them, if they're a threat to your country, to your very existence, we're in a different world. We're in a world that is, in fact, becoming ungovernable.

Well, there are some people who warned us this would happen, and I wish I'd listened to them. Here are three of them: John Adams, George Washington, James Madison. But they all said it. Franklin, Hamilton. Some version of this. What you see here are three quotations. You may have heard them.

Adams says that the Constitution is wholly inadequate to a people that's not moral and religious. George Washington, this is from the Farewell Address: "Reason and experience both forbid us to expect that national morality can prevail in exclusion of religious principle." To suppose, this is Madison, that any form of government will secure liberty or happiness without any virtue in the people is a chimerical idea.

What the founders were telling us here is not that this is a Christian nation per se, or that you have to believe in Jesus Christ or any other religion to be a good American. They're making a more subtle point about liberalism, our form of government. Liberalism, the idea that people are created free and equal, gives us the Constitution, which gives us a process for compromising and working things out and dividing power.

But the founders understood that those principles are not self-sustaining. They rely on an underlying substrate of what they called Republican virtue, virtues like honesty, civility, forbearance, law-abidingness. And they expected that religion in America would do a large share of the job of socializing us into the institutions that they gave us to maintain.

And there's an even deeper reason, I would argue, perhaps even deeper than that, why there have been these consequences of the collapse of Christianity. I happen to come across this. This is just from December. This is something, I just thought this was such a beautiful statement by former German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who's asking the core question about liberalism.

For grammatical continuity, here is the end of the previous section:

---

TEXT TO EDIT:
Because freedom is something rather difficult; then all of a sudden you have to decide yourself: I'm not only free from something, but also free for something, free to do something good for society. And my experience is that makes you happy. Our liberal democracy can make us free from tyranny and oppression, but it cannot tell us what we are free for. What's our purpose on this planet? Are we more than just a passing clump of cells? And most people and societies need an answer to that question.

And what I didn't understand in 2003 was that in the absence of great church teachings, communal worship, prayerfulness, and the shaping of attitudes and souls that go with that, in the absence of that, we would see the rise of substitute religions. There's a wonderful book about this called Strange Rites by Isabella Tara Burton. It covers everything from Wicca, witchcraft, to soul cycle, DIY religions. But they are very non-institutional; they don't have storied histories, theologies, and deep moralities and all the traditions that go with that.

And then you've also got political movements that have taken on some of the roles of religion. Wokeness, as John McWhorter describes it, is one such movement. QAnon, I would argue, is another. MAGA has aspects of an idolatrous religion. These things have their place, but they are no substitute for the great religious traditions that date back hundreds and thousands of years and are deeply rooted in evolved theologies.

Now, one of the things the book covers, which I won't cover in any detail, is a little bit of defensive action because there's a whole crew in America right now called post-liberals and integralists who look at the situation and say, "We're to blame. You secular people have created a kind of tyrannical, all-consuming, individualistic, consumeristic, anti-family, anti-faith, anti-tradition form of liberalism that makes it impossible to be a good Christian or a good religious person in our society."

I agree that we in liberal America and consumerist America have made it difficult to be a Christian. I would submit that there's evidence in the Christian Bible that it has never been easy to be a Christian. And I like to quote our friend Ben, who says: "When religion is good, I conceive it will support itself; and when it does not support itself, and God does not take care to support it, so that its professors are obliged to call for help of the civil power, it is a sign I apprehend of its being a bad religion."

The message from my book is: yes, Christianity faces challenges. But if we're going to have an honest conversation about the de-churching of America, it would be helpful to start by Christians looking in the mirror.

So, what do we see if we look in the mirror? Now, I'm an outsider of the church. I hope it's clear that I come from a place of needfulness, respect and love for Christianity. But what follows is a little critical. Here is the trend that we have seen since mid-20th century: two waves of secularization.

The first was in the mainline church, which got away from teaching the Bible, doctrine, cultural distinctiveness, and became more of a lifestyle choice and political choice about social justice and so forth. Well motivated, but it turned out to be too weak and too secular to maintain adherents; followers drifted away into the larger society.

But then you had a second wave, and this is the wave that has really hit white Protestant churches, especially evangelical churches. I should say that in what follows, I'm not addressing Catholics; I am addressing white Protestant evangelicalism. You hunt where the ducks are—that's where the crisis is right now.

What's happened there is a particular form of secularization: politicization. Starting in the age of Jerry Falwell and Pat Robertson in the 1980s, white evangelicals formed a union with the Republican Party. They began to vote Republican. That solidified over time. Here's how that looks:

Evangelicals have become more Republican over the last two decades. This is from Gallup data; you can see that steady trend. Here is evangelical voting: it has leaned Republican for many years, going back to the 80s. But starting in this century, it swings over and becomes the most solid Republican voting bloc—in presidential elections, 80 plus percent.

Here's a really interesting chart. This one's a little tricky to understand, but I will do my best. This is from the religious demographer Ryan Burge, who's the best in the business. So surveys asked people of different Christian stripes to place themselves on an ideological spectrum and also to place the two parties on an ideological spectrum, and see how they matched up.

And what you can see here in the upper left: that's white evangelicals. They are exactly, precisely in line with the Republican Party. That is not true of any other Christian group. Non-white evangelicals, mainlines, white Catholics, non-white Catholics, and down there, lower right, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints—they have historically been close to Republicans—but look what happens in 2017: they differentiate.

So white evangelicals stand out, and it's reached the point where Ryan Burge tells us: "Evangelicalism used to be a term that denoted a certain adherence to a specific theology and active engagement in a Protestant community. Now evangelicalism just means I am a conservative Republican. It's become little more than a cultural marker and has little to do with any type of religious devotion to the teachings of Jesus Christ."

So white evangelicals made a bargain in the 80s, 90s, but especially recently: they made a gamble that they could influence and unite with the Republican Party without the Church being equivalently influenced by partisan politics. And it turns out that they were wrong about that.

Over the same period when the Church has politicized, it has shrunk. We've seen that happen. A lot of people who are there for non-political reasons, who want to hear the Gospel preached, have been drifting away. And something else has happened: others have entered the Church not for the message of Jesus Christ but because it's become part of the partisan conservative brand.

Labeling evangelical is something that denotes who you are. This is particularly interesting data from Ryan Burge. This is the percentage of non-church-going evangelicals—they identify as evangelicals, but they don't show up. This gives you some idea of the increase in filtering into the Church and its change in composition into a less godly type of follower.

You can see this goes from 5% in 2008 to about an eighth of churchgoers today. And you can see how that trend line is growing. So we've seen a change in the composition of the Church. We have also seen a change in the attitudes of the Church.

Here is a poll result you may all have seen: this is super famous. This is from Public Religion Research Institute. In 2011, what this shows is Christians of different denominations were asked if an elected official who commits an immoral act in their personal life can still behave ethically and fulfill their duties in their public and professional life.

This is a little tricky because the answer and the question don't match in terms of whether they're stated negatively or positively. But what this shows is that in 2011, white evangelicals were the Christians in America who most said: "Character is important in an elected official." Only five years later, in 2016, they were the Christians who were least likely to say that character matters in an elected official.

Hmm, again, what happened in 2016? But here's one that we really should think about potentially even more. I call it the Church of Fear: this is the percentage of people of different religions saying that their religion is under attack in America. And you see two lines in this chart stand out.

Now, this is taken in 2023. Two-thirds of Jews think their religion is under attack. You may agree with me that in 2023, with what was going on in campuses and elsewhere, Jews had some reason to answer yes to that question. But two-thirds of evangelical Christians are also coming from this place of feeling that they are under attack, that they are living in fear.

And they're giving answers to this: people are asked whether they agree that immigrants entering the country illegally today are poisoning the blood of our country. As you can see there, there is exactly one Christian denomination that agrees, majority, with that sentiment—and that's white evangelical Protestants. And you can see that their answer to that question is perhaps not all that surprisingly exactly the same as the standard Republican view.

So I call this the church of fear. Here's an example of what it sounds like: This is a pastor named Jim Garlow. "The homosexual movement, the LBGTQ, the transgender movement is being forced upon us. The climate change that's forced upon us is taking our private property rights."

And you'll go to one country after another. They use the same language over and over. Satan is not particularly creative in the way he's operating right now. I assure you, the enemy would love to take this congregation out. And they would get it by going after him. If a pastor will not stand, the people should leave that place.

There it is: They're coming here; they're coming for you; they're out to get you. Be afraid; be very afraid. And he goes on to say, "By the way, you should buy my book and you can get a whole case of it on discount."

Here's something else that comes from that. These are promises made by Donald J. Trump in 2016 and 2024 during his campaigns. I picked them at random: He says this again and again. It's his core message to Christians.

Christianity will have power. Christianity, if I'm there, you're going to have plenty of power. You don't need anyone else. If I get in, you're going to be using that power at a level that you've never used before. Power in the earthly world: That's what he's promising.

And what are the implications of the search for power for Christians and Christian doctrine? Well, we don't have to wonder because his son, Donald Trump Jr., told us: "We've been playing t-ball for half a century while they're playing hardball and cheating. Right. We've turned the other cheek and I understand. I understand sort of the biblical reference. I understand the mentality."

But it's gotten us nothing. It's gotten us nothing. It's gotten us nothing. That guy who died on the cross: What did it get him? What did it get his followers? Have you had it with being a sucker?

That's the message we're getting. Well, I'm not here to tell you this in my own voice; I'm an outsider. I get that. I'm being presumptuous. But I've been listening to Christians. And their hearts are wounded by what they're seeing in the church.

This is Russell Moore: He is a former senior official at the Southern Baptist Convention. Today, he's the editor of Christianity Today. Wrote a book called Losing Our Religion. It's a wonderful book. He makes these points particularly well:

"The frantic rage we can often display in supposedly protecting Christian values might feel like strength, but the world sees it for what it is: fear, anxiety, and lack of confidence. They can also see that it's nothing like the confident tranquility of Jesus."

He goes on to say: "That sense of paralyzing fear can also fuel the loss of the next generation. If the only choices we offer are secularization and paganization, we shouldn't be surprised that they choose one or the other."

This is causing not just the diminishment of the church, its witness, and the decline in its membership; it's causing pastoral burnouts.

The people who like this the least are the pastors. The first wave of politicization came from the pastorate, from big public leaders like Falwell and Robertson. This wave is very different: Pastors are going to church and discovering parishioners are watching as pastors say, "We get them for an hour a week if we're lucky."

Cable news gets them for 12 hours. The parishioners are bringing to that church and saying, "Our way of life is in danger. We can't afford to lose the battle for our culture. Our church needs to get into the culture war. We need to fight, fight, fight." A pastor I talked to called this a battlefield mindset, and this is one of the results of this.

This is a poll of pastors conducted a couple of years ago: 42% had given real serious consideration to quitting full-time ministry the last year. Here's the reasons that they gave:

Being a pastor is a hard job; so the first two reasons are things like the immense stress of the job, and I feel lonely and isolated. But there's number three, the third from the top there: current political divisions.

When I talk to pastors, they want to be preaching the gospel of Jesus Christ. But they dial into their email Monday morning, and it's an inbox full of emails saying, "What is this? Turn the other cheek garbage." Very discouraging.

This is the aforementioned Russell Moore, but he's with David French, another evangelical. He's a New York Times writer now. He's not clergy. But he makes a point here which I want to listen to; I want you to listen to very closely because this is the hinge toward the correction that I spoke about earlier.

The fruit of the spirit are not just tactics to be deployed to win people over; they're the markers of who we are, okay? And then the last thing I'll say is: You cannot go into the political world and say, "You know, I know I'm a bit of an asshole on Twitter, but you should see me in the soup kitchen." And that's just not the way it works. You can't cabin off parts of your life.

You can all guess what the bleeped-out word is so you get the message there.

For grammatical continuity, here is the end of the previous section.

---

Christianity, like all of the great faiths, is not meant to be something you just do in your immediate environment, in your home, your church, maybe your community. It's meant to be a seamless garment. It's meant to cover all your life. Here is a term that I did not know; I had never been exposed to it, and yet I started work on this book. Raise your hand if you know these terms. Are these part of the Latter-day Saint tradition? Discipleship is spiritual formation, not so much. In the evangelical world, these basically mean the same thing. And they mean forming your life and your character in word and deed in the image of Jesus Christ. So here's another breakthrough moment for me. This is something that was said by John Ward. He's a journalist who was an evangelical but recently converted to Catholicism. Author of a wonderful book, which I can't recommend too highly: "Testimony Inside the Evangelical Movement That Failed a Generation." And here's what he said in a podcast: "One of the conclusions I've come to in writing the book that I've finished recently is just that a lot of evangelical churches do a pretty good job of discipling their members in private virtue or private character within the family. Yes, there have been scandals and leadership scandals and abuse scandals, but I think broadly evangelicals are virtuous people in their homes and in their local communities, but they have not been discipled in how to exercise public character." So that's interesting, right? So we have this concept of spiritual formation, but it hasn't been extended by Christians in today’s America to the public realm. It's spiritual formation in your own life, but it hasn’t developed a civic theology. A civic theology is a doctrine, a fully articulated doctrine of how Jesus would want us to behave, not just in our community, not just rebuilding homes when hurricanes strike, but how we behave, for example, on social media, how we comport ourselves in politics—not the positions we ultimately take, but the way in which we address our fellow citizens in politics. There has been an immense, gaping hole in Christianity for lack of a fully articulated civic theology, and in the absence of a civic theology of how Christians should address our common culture and politics. There has been the inrush of all these other forces we've seen, such as toxic polarization and partisanship.

Meanwhile, it turns out the Bible has something to say about this. Here are the three principal teachings of Christianity, according to theologians: You know, others say other things matter too—redemption, repentance, and so on—but these are the big three, according to theologians I consulted. Number one, don't be afraid. The most frequent injunction in the Bible. Number two, be like Jesus. Imitate him. And number three, forgive each other. They say if you get those things right in your life, that's Christian discipleship. So I'm an outsider looking at those three things, and a light goes on. Where have I seen those kinds of virtues talked about before? And here’s where: Those three virtues—don't be afraid, imitate Jesus, and forgive each other—map quite neatly onto three of the core tenets of Madisonian constitutional liberalism, the things the founders told us we need to do to defend the system they gave us. Don’t be afraid maps on to being willing to share power. Do not view the next election as a fearful apocalypse. Understand you might lose an election, but maybe you win the one after that, and in the meantime, you actually get the opportunity to learn and improve. Welcome the uncertainty inherent in sharing a liberal republic.

Imitate Jesus: Jesus is a radical egalitarian. He is concerned with the least of these. He consorts with the most downtrodden and marginalized. And he also preaches the equal and full dignity of every human being. Those are two core tenets of liberalism,